Detached Elements documentation (#1597)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/dom-leaks.md

---
description: Use the Detached Elements tool in the Microsoft Edge DevTools to find and fix DOM memory leaks.
title: Debug DOM memory leaks
author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.date: 11/29/2021
ms.topic: article
ms.prod: microsoft-edge

> keywords: microsoft edge, web development, f12 tools, devtools, detached elements, dom, memory, leak, node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keywords: microsoft edge, web development, f12 tools, devtools, detached elements, document object model, dom, memory, leak, node
```

---

# Debug DOM memory leaks with the Detached Elements tool

> A memory leak can occur in your application when an element is no longer attached to the DOM tree but is still referenced by some JavaScript running on the page. These elements are called **detached elements**. In order for the browser to garbage collect (GC) the detached element, there must be no references to the element from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A memory leak can occur in your application when an element is no longer attached to the Document Object Model (DOM) tree but is still referenced by some JavaScript running on the page. These elements are called **detached elements**. Before the browser can garbage collect (GC) the detached element, there must be no references to the element from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code.
```

> The following sections show you how to use the **Detached Elements** tool in the Microsoft Edge DevTools to find detached elements that the browser cannot GC in a demo application and identify the JavaScript that is still referencing the detached element. By changing your JavaScript to release the element, you will be able to reduce the number of detached elements on your page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections show you how to use the **Detached Elements** tool in Microsoft Edge DevTools to find detached elements that the browser cannot GC in a demo application and identify the JavaScript that is still referencing the detached element. By changing your JavaScript to release the element, you reduce the number of detached elements on your page.
```

For more information about heap snapshots and detached elements, read [Discover detached DOM tree memory leaks with Heap Snapshots](/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/#discover-detached-dom-tree-memory-leaks-with-heap-snapshots).

## Open the Detached Elements tool

> The **Detached Elements** tool is available as an experiment since Microsoft Edge version 93 and is available by default in Microsoft Edge version 97. Check your version of Microsoft Edge by navigating to `edge://version`. If your version number is less than 97, read [Turning an experiment on or off

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Detached Elements** tool is available as an experiment starting with Microsoft Edge version 93 and is available by default in Microsoft Edge version 97. Check your version of Microsoft Edge by opening `edge://version`. If your version number is less than 97, read [Turning an experiment on or off](/devtools-guide-chromium/experimental-features/#turning-an-experiment-on-or-off) for instructions on turning on the **Detached Elements** experiment.
```

> ](/devtools-guide-chromium/experimental-features/#turning-an-experiment-on-or-off) for instructions on turning the `Detached Elements` experiment on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> To open the **Detached Elements** tool against our demo application, complete the following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To open the **Detached Elements** tool in the demo application, complete the following steps.
```

Reviewer 2: To open the **Detached Elements** tool for the demo application:

1. Navigate to the [demo application](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/detached-elements/).
1. [Open DevTools](/devtools-guide-chromium/#opening-devtools).

> 1. Select the + button in the toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the + button in the toolbar.
```

> 1. Select the **Detached Elements** entry in the menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the **Detached Elements** entry in the menu.
```

:::image type="complex" source="./images/open-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Open the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/open-detached-elements.msft.png":::
   Open the Detached Elements tool
:::image-end:::

## Get Detached Elements

> The **Get Detached Elements** button in the **Detached Elements** tool will find all of the detached elements on the page and display them. To find detached elements in our demo application, complete the following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Get Detached Elements** button in the **Detached Elements** tool will find and display all of the detached elements on the page. To find detached elements in our demo application, complete the following steps.
```

> 1. Ensure you are in **Room 1** in the demo application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make sure you are in **Room 1** of the demo application.
```

1. Select the **Simulate high traffic** button in the demo application.
1. Select **Stop** after generating some messages in the demo application.
1. Select **Room 2** in the demo application.
1. Select **Get Detached Elements** in the **Detached Elements** tool.

:::image type="complex" source="./images/get-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Get Detached Elements in the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/get-detached-elements.msft.png":::
   Get Detached Elements in the Detached Elements tool
:::image-end:::

The **Detached Elements** tool displays a list of all of the detached elements on the page.  All of the messages that were generated in **Room 1** are no longer attached to the DOM when you switch to **Room 2** in the demo application but they are still referenced by JavaScript.  

## Trigger Garbage Collection

You can trigger garbage collection (GC) in the browser from the **Detached Elements** tool. Complete the following steps.

1. Select the **Collect Garbage** button in the **Detached Elements** tool.
1. Select the **Get Detached Elements** button in the **Detached Elements** tool.

> By selecting the **Collect Garbage** button, the browser will run GC, and by selecting the **Get Detached Elements** button, the **Detached Elements** tool will display all detached elements that cannot be GC'd. These detached elements may be memory leaks if they are not going to be reused by the application.

Reviewer 2: @vchapel - "GC" should be ok if introduced spelled out.  But the construction "GD'd" is quirky, might need web research & judgment: how to introduce?  Is that construction viable per industry usage?
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/g/garbage-collection-garbage-collector

Reviewer: I was just going to spell it out.

> By selecting the **Collect Garbage** button, the browser will run GC, and by selecting the **Get Detached Elements** button, the **Detached Elements** tool will display all detached elements that cannot be GC'd. These detached elements may be memory leaks if they are not going to be reused by the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By selecting the **Collect Garbage** button, the browser runs GC. Selecting the **Get Detached Elements** button, the **Detached Elements** tool displays all detached elements that cannot be garbage collected. These detached elements may be memory leaks if they are not going to be reused by the application.
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: @vchapel - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/experimental-features/#detached-elements
typo that could reasonably be fixed using this PR.  It's in a different .md file than the new .md file, but is on-topic for this PR:
Memory leaks in web applications are a difficult to locate and repair.

description: Use the Detached Elements tool in the Microsoft Edge DevTools to find and fix DOM memory leaks.
title: Debug DOM memory leaks
author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.date: 11/29/2021
ms.topic: article
ms.prod: microsoft-edge
keywords: microsoft edge, web development, f12 tools, devtools, detached elements, document object model, dom, memory, leak, node
---

# Debug DOM memory leaks with the Detached Elements tool

A memory leak can occur in your application when an element is no longer attached to the Document Object Model (DOM) tree, but is still referenced by some JavaScript running on the page. These elements are called *detached elements*. For the browser to garbage collect (GC) the detached element, the element must not be referenced from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code.

This article describes how to use the **Detached Elements** tool in Microsoft Edge DevTools to find detached elements that the browser cannot GC in a demo application and identify the JavaScript that is still referencing the detached element. By changing your JavaScript to release the element, you reduce the number of detached elements on your page.

> For more information about heap snapshots and detached elements, read [Discover detached DOM tree memory leaks with Heap Snapshots](/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/#discover-detached-dom-tree-memory-leaks-with-heap-snapshots).

Reviewer 3: I think we should use a relative link here (same for the other links on this page).

## Open the Detached Elements tool

> The **Detached Elements** tool is available as an experiment beginning with Microsoft Edge version 93 and is available by default in Microsoft Edge version 97 and later. Check your version of Microsoft Edge by navigating to `edge://version`. If your version is less than 97, read [Turning an experiment on or off](/devtools-guide-chromium/experimental-features/#turning-an-experiment-on-or-off) for instructions about turning on the **Detached Elements** experiment.

Reviewer 3: I would remove the `beginning with Microsoft Edge version 93` part. This version is older than stable now. So maybe: `The **Detached Elements** tool is available by default in Microsoft Edge 97 and later. If your version is older than 97, read ...`

To open the **Detached Elements** tool for the demo application:

1. Open the [demo application](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/detached-elements/).

1. [Open DevTools](/devtools-guide-chromium/#opening-devtools).

1. Click the **+** button in the toolbar.

1. Click **Detached Elements**.

:::image type="complex" source="./images/open-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Open the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/open-detached-elements.msft.png":::
   Open the Detached Elements tool
:::image-end:::

> ## Get Detached Elements

Reviewer 3: Headers don't need to be capitalized, this can be changed to `Get detached elements` (same for the other headers).

The **Get Detached Elements** button in the **Detached Elements** tool will find and display all of the detached elements on the page. To find detached elements in the demo application, complete the following steps:

1. Make sure you are in **Room 1** of the demo application.

1. Click the **Simulate high traffic** button.

1. Click **Stop** after generating some messages in the demo application.

1. Click **Room 2**.

1. In the **Detached Elements** tool, click **Get Detached Elements**.

> :::image type="complex" source="./images/get-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Get Detached Elements using the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/get-detached-elements.msft.png":::

Reviewer 3: We usually prefer taking screenshots with the default settings, which means DevTools should use the Light+ (default) theme. Could we please retake this screenshot (and the others that are in dark theme below)?

   Get Detached Elements using the Detached Elements tool.
:::image-end:::

The **Detached Elements** tool displays all of the detached elements on the page. All of the messages that were generated in **Room 1** are no longer attached to the DOM when you switch to **Room 2** in the demo application, but they are still referenced by JavaScript.  

## Trigger Garbage Collection

You can trigger garbage collection (GC) in the browser from the **Detached Elements** tool. Complete the following steps;

1. In the **Detached Elements** tool, click **Collect Garbage**.

1. Click **Get Detached Elements**.

When you select **Collect Garbage**, the browser run GC. When you select **Get Detached Elements**, the **Detached Elements** tool displays all detached elements that cannot be garbage collected. These detached elements may be memory leaks if they are not going to be reused by the application.

> ## Analyze

Reviewer 3: This could be more self-explanatory. How about `Identify the JavaScript code that retains detached elements`

Once you have found a detached element that the browser cannot GC, you can use the **Analyze** button in the **Detached Elements** tool to identify the JavaScript code running on the page that is still referencing the detached element. The **Analyze** button will take a heap snapshot and populate the **ID** of the detached element with its location in the heap. For more information about heap snapshots, read [Record heap snapshots](/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots).

:::image type="complex" source="./images/analyze-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Analyze Detached Elements in the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/analyze-detached-elements.msft.png":::
   Analyze Detached Elements in the Detached Elements tool
:::image-end:::

> Complete the following steps:

Reviewer 3: This sounds a little bit robotic. Consider: `To identify the JavaScript code that references a detached element:`.

1. In the **Detached Elements** tool, click **Analyze**.

> The **Memory** tool opens in the bottom panel of DevTools.

Reviewer 3: This needs to be indented otherwise it breaks the list numbering.

   Identifying the JavaScript that is retaining the detached element.
:::image-end:::

You have now identified the retainer that is preventing the detached element from being garbage collected by the browser!

## Next steps

When looking for memory leaks, remember that leaks can depend on the context of your application. For the demo application, you found detached elements that could not be garbage collected by the browser and identified the JavaScript retaining the detached elements. However, in the context of the demo application, it makes sense to retain the list of chat messages so that if a user switches back to **Room 1**, the message log is preserved.

:::image type="complex" source="./images/detached-elements-reattached.msft.png" alt-text="The detached elements are reattached to the DOM when switching back to Room 1." lightbox="./images/detached-elements-reattached.msft.png":::
   The detached elements are reattached to the DOM when switching back to Room 1.

> :::image-end:::

Reviewer 3: It's not entirely clear to me what this image illustrates without the description (which is only visible if I click on the image to see the lightbox).
The text before it makes sense to me, and is enough for me to understand the point. I don't think the image really adds much value. If we want to keep it, we should add a clear description above it, in the article.

Similarly, a feed in social media might detach elements as users scroll past them and reattach them to the DOM when users scroll back up. Detached elements are not always an indication of a memory leak and memory leaks are not always caused by detached elements.

For long-running apps, small memory leaks of only a few kilobytes can noticeably degrade performance over time. Web developers who use the React framework know that React maintains a virtualized copy of the DOM. Failing to properly unmount components can potentially lead to an application leaking large parts of the virtual DOM.

The demo app and leaks were artificial. Test the tool on your production website or app to see if you can find potential problems. If you do, [contact the Microsoft Edge DevTools team](../contact.md) to send feedback about the **Detached Elements** tool and memory leak debugging.

## Additional features

* In the **Detached Elements** tool, select the **Detach Elements** button to destroy the parent-child links inside a detached tree. Select **Collect garbage** to identify the culprit node in a detached tree that is causing the entire tree to be retained.

> * In the **Detached Elements** tool, change the target in the **Selected target** dropdown to select a different origin. Use this dropdown to select different frames or origins for the tool.

Reviewer 3: These 2 features could be in their own h2 sections. 

```
## Identify the DOM node causing others to be retained

Because the DOM is a fully connected graph, when one DOM node is retained in memory by JavaScript, it can cause other DOM nodes to be retained with it.

To identify the culprit node is a detached tree that is causing the entire tree to be retained:

* Click **Detach elements** to destroy the parent-child links inside the detached tree.
* Click **Collect garbage**.
```

And then you can perhaps add a screenshot with red boxes around the buttons that need to be clicked.

Same thing for the target selection feature.

## Open the Detached Elements tool

The **Detached Elements** tool is available by default in Microsoft Edge 97 and later. Check your version of Microsoft Edge by going to `edge://version`. If your version is less than 97, read [Turning an experiment on or off](../experimental-features/index.md#turning-an-experiment-on-or-off) for instructions about turning on the **Detached Elements** experiment.

To open the **Detached Elements** tool:

1. Open the [demo application](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/detached-elements/).

1. [Open DevTools](../open/index.md).

1. Click the **+** button in the toolbar.

1. Click **Detached Elements**.

:::image type="content" source="./images/open-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Open the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/open-detached-elements.msft.png":::

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Get detached elements

The **Get Detached Elements** (![The Get Detached Elements icon.](images/get-detached-elements-icon-light-mode.png)) button in the **Detached Elements** tool finds and displays all of the detached elements on a web page.

> To find detached elements in the demo application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To find detached elements:
```

1. In the demo application, click the **Room 1** button.

1. In the demo application, click the **Simulate high traffic** button.

> 

Reviewer 2: @zoherghadyali - It would be good to add a screenshot showing content in the webpage on left & DevTools on right.

1. After some messages are generated in the demo application, click the **Stop** button in the demo application.

1. Click the **Room 2** button.

1. In the **Detached Elements** tool, click the **Get Detached Elements** (![The Get Detached Elements icon.](images/get-detached-elements-icon-light-mode.png)) icon.

:::image type="content" source="./images/get-detached-elements.msft.png" alt-text="Get Detached Elements using the Detached Elements tool." lightbox="./images/get-detached-elements.msft.png":::

The **Detached Elements** tool displays all of the detached elements of the page.  When you switch to **Room 2** in the demo application, the messages that were generated in **Room 1** are no longer attached to the DOM, but they are still referenced by JavaScript.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Trigger Garbage Collection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Trigger garbage collection
```
